# Structure

Structure helps readers and writers for the same reasons: an explicit structure makes arguments clearer, and allows one to process the paper one part at a time rather than keeping it all in mind.

**A paper is really a concatenation of four pieces of writing.** First, a news report providing a factual summary. Second, a textbook chapter explaining what the paper proposes. Third, a lab report describing experiments and results. Fourth, a blog post presenting the authors' informed opinion.

**The news report** has two sub-parts, the abstract and the introduction. The abstract is a short description of the paper, whose goal is to make readers want to read the entire paper. The introduction is a summary of the rest of the paper, whose goal is to let readers know the purpose of each section, ending in an explicit list of contributions.

The abstract only contains four sentences: \(1\) what is the problem, \(2\) why is it a problem, \(3\) what is your idea, and \(4\) what results from applying your idea. Optionally, if you published an artifact related to the paper such as source code, add a sentence with a link to the artifact. There is no need to say more.

The introduction contains one paragraph for every subsequent section in the paper, summarizing the section and ending with a forward reference to that section. Sometimes multiple related sections can be summarized in a single paragraph, such as multiple sections that test different hypotheses about the proposed solution. The introduction ends with one paragraph explicitly listing the paper's contributions.

**The textbook chapter** has two sub-parts, the background and the contribution. The background is a summary of past results and how the paper expands on them, whose goals are simultaneously to provide readers with the necessary information to understand the rest of the paper and to make the paper's novelty explicit. The contribution is a detailed explanation of what the paper proposes, whose goal is to give readers all of the information necessary to implement the proposed solution themselves.

The background contains information that the average reader is not expected to know, presented in a way that naturally leads the reader to ask the question the paper is answering. As Leslie Lamport [said](http://lamport.azurewebsites.net/pubs/state-the-problem.pdf), "state the problem before describing the solution". For instance, a computer science paper does not need to explain that computers have a CPU, but may need to explain recent trends in computer networking hardware, leading readers to notice a "gap" in current hardware models. The background may be particularly long for papers that require deeply technical knowledge that few readers possess.

The background must not act as a "wall" between the reader and the rest of the paper, filled with obscure details that only make sense to readers who already know the subject well. Previous work should be mentioned at a high level, in terms of advances, limits, and tradeoffs. The background must not contain previous work that is not directly related to the paper's positioning.

The contribution contains enough detail that a knowledgeable reader should be able to reimplement the paper themselves. Steps that are obvious to knowledgeable readers need not be mentioned, unless they are required for other readers to understand the paper. The contribution should clearly state the inputs, outputs, limitations, and any other relevant details of any proposed technique in a single location, without requiring readers to combined scattered pieces of information themselves.

The contribution may be split in multiple sections, starting with a "design" section that discusses high-level tradeoffs and choices, and ending with an "implementation" section that describes low-level details such as existing tools the authors used and important low-level optimizations. The contribution should highlight principles that are applicable beyond your paper itself, and ideally to a wider domain than your current one.

**The lab report** has a single purpose: the evaluation. The evaluation is a precise and factual description of experiments, along with their results and any conclusions that can be made from the results. This can be a single section, or multiple sections if there are multiple aspects to evaluate. Each section starts with information about the experimental setup, such as the exact hardware used.

The evaluation should explain which experiments were performed and why. If some experiments that readers might expect were not performed, their absence should also be explained. Experiments can use previous results as justification, such as performing a microbenchmark to understand where the bottleneck is within a larger benchmark. Poor results are not a justification for excluding an experiment, and should be included along with an explanation.

**The blog post** has a single purpose, the discussion, but may also need to discuss related work and conclude to adhere to reviewer expectations. This is an unfortunate but necessary concession to the current system. While an explicit "related work" section makes little sense since truly related work should be mentioned in the rest of the paper by virtue of being related, reviewers often expect papers to explicitly mention "related" work that accomplishes something similar in a different context, or that could be used in tandem with the paper's contribution. This is a way for the authors to show that they have done their homework, even if most readers will not care. Similarly, an explicit conclusion is not useful as the paper's abstract already provides a concise summary, but reviewers often expect papers to have one.

The discussion has a more relaxed tone than the rest of the paper, including the use of speculations about future work. It's a place for the authors to provide their opinion on their work and on the more general area around their work as well, such as their takeaways from the project, and which avenues for future work appear most interesting to the authors. The discussion should not promise any specific future work from the authors, as such promises are unlikely to be kept and may discourage readers from pursuing research in that area.

